FAQ.txt
BASICloader version : in development, don't use it yet
(c) 2017-2019 Richard John Foster Cavell
https://github.com/richardcavell/BASICloader

1.  What is BASICloader?

BASICloader is a generator of magazine type-in programs.

2.  What is a magazine "type-in program"?

In the 1980s, 8-bit computer systems were commonplace. The most popular
machines had some form of BASIC built-in. It was possible to program these
computers using BASIC, or directly using machine language.

Magazines that were dedicated to these 8-bit computer systems would feature
"type-in" programs, printed in the pages of the magazine. The idea is that
the reader would type the programs into their machine and run them.

3.  What sort of type-in programs can be generated by BASICloader?

Many of these type-in programs contained a machine language program, in the
form of many DATA values. The program would poke these values into an
appropriate part of RAM, and then transfer control of the computer over
to the machine language program once it was set up.

BASICloader generates the BASIC program, when given the machine language
program as input.

4.  How does it work?

The core of the output program is a loop that uses a READ statement and
the POKE command. The program will contain DATA statements as well.

It will then (optionally) execute the program using an EXEC (Coco/Dragon)
or SYS (C64) call.

5. On what machine does the BASICloader program run?

On any machine you like.

However, you will have trouble using BASICloader on a machine with
limited RAM. BASICloader will work best on a more powerful machine, such as
an IBM PC, or a computer designed to run UNIX.

It is completely acceptable to run BASICloader on a different machine to
the one that is the intended target of the resulting output. For example,
you can use an IBM PC to generate a BASIC program that is intended to be run
on a Commodore 64.

6. What operating systems can BASICloader run on?

Any operating system that can compile standard C.

BASICloader works better on those operating systems that have a robust
command line environment.  This includes Linux, UNIX, OS X, MacOS, MS-DOS,
and OS/2.

You can also run it on Windows and many other operating systems.

7. Should I run it on an 8-bit machine?

(To "target" a computer, for our purposes, means to create a BASIC program
that will run on that machine).

You might find it tedious to run this program on the actual 8-bit machine
that the output targets. These machines typically don't have these
things, which you need:

  * A standards-compliant, properly functioning implementation of the
    C language. (Both the compiler and the run-time)
  * A proper command line. You will get the best experience if you can
    specify command-line switches.
  * Additional tools necessary to manipulate the output text file.
  * Terminal displays (or printers) that can display many lines at once.

8. Which character set should I be using?

BASICloader supports ASCII. Support for machine-specific character sets
is not yet implemented.

You should be aware of whether your target machine supports uppercase and/or
lowercase characters, and ensure that the output case (ie whether the output
BASIC program is in upper, lower or mixed case) is suitable for your target
machine.

9. What language is BASICloader written in?

It is written in standard C (the C89 dialect, to be precise), and uses
the C standard library.

10. How do I build BASICloader?

The Makefile is intended for GNU Make. Simply type "make". The output file
will be called BASICloader.

If you don't have GNU Make, you will have to compile BASICloader manually.
This won't be difficult. There is only one source file. You need to compile
the file called "BASICloader.c".

11. Which additional libraries or header files do I need to install?

None whatsoever.

BASICloader is written in C89. It uses only the standard library. It does
not use any external libraries, header files, or operating system calls
whatsoever.

12. Which computers can BASICloader target?

Currently BASICloader supports the following target computers:

  * TRS-80 Color Computer 1, 2 and 3
  * TRS-80 Color Computer 1, 2 and 3 with Extended Color BASIC
  * Dragon 32 and Dragon 64
  * Commodore 64

A number of computer models that are similar to the above machines will
be able to run the output as well.

The Color Computer can be referred to as "Coco".

13. What does BASICloader take as input?

The input file can be a plain binary, an RS-DOS Coco file, a Dragon DOS file,
or a Commodore 64 PRG file.

It will typically be a machine language program, but it can be any data you
like.

14. Where is the resulting machine language program placed in memory?

You choose. You can specify this on the command line.

We might refer to the machine language program, once it has been POKEd into
memory, as a "binary blob".

Advanced info:

The Coco, Dragon and PRG formats specify the start location (where the
binary blob is loaded to). BASICloader will identify this start location.

If you don't specify the start address on the command line, BASICloader will
use the address specified in the input file, or use a sensible default.

If you specify a different address on the command line to the one that is in
the input file, BASICloader will warn you.

15. Where does execution of the machine language program begin?

You choose. You can specify this on the command line.

Advanced info:

The Coco and Dragon file formats specify an exec location (where program
execution begins), in addition to specifying a start location.  BASICloader
will correctly read the exec addresses, if the input file format provides one.

If you don't specify an exec location on the command line, BASICloader will
use the address specified in the input file. For binary and PRG files,
BASICloader assumes that execution starts at the first (lowest) memory
location.

If you specify a different address on the command line to the one that is in
the input file, BASICloader will warn you.

16. What are the command line options?

You can read more about the command line options in the file Options.txt,
which is distributed with BASICloader. You can also run ./BASICloader --help

17. What if I want to know more about what's going on internally?

You can read about technical information in Technical_info.txt, which
is distributed with BASICloader.

You can also run BASICloader with the --diag option, which will print
out diagnostic information.

18. Can I use other tools with the output of this program?

Yes. You can use the output of this program with:

  * c1541   (part of VICE)
  * decb    (part of the Toolshed)
  * MAME
  * petcat  (part of VICE)
  * VICE
  * XRoar

See the file Examples.txt for some examples.

19. Who wrote this program?

Me, Richard John Foster Cavell.

I'm an Australian man living near Blackpool in England.

You can find some of my software at https://github.com/richardcavell

20. What is my license to use this program?

This program is free open source software. There is a custom license,
which you can read in the LICENSE file, which should have been distributed
with the BASICloader program. You can also run ./BASICloader --license

The output of this program is licensed to you under the following license:

    1.  You may use the output of this program for any worthwhile or moral
        purpose.
    2.  There is no charge to you for using this program, or for using or
        distributing its output.
    3.  You should try to attribute me and the BASICloader program, where
        that is not unreasonable.

You should not allow people to assume that you wrote the BASIC code yourself.

21. Where can I find out more?

    https://github.com/richardcavell/BASICloader

Richard Cavell
