BASICloader Technical info
(c) 2017
In development, don't use it yet

== Memory maps ==

The old 8-bit machines typically rely on the programmer to manage the memory
map. Neither BASICloader nor the program emitted by it can do all that is
necessary to ensure that your memory map is laid out sensibly, with no
overlaps.  You will need to study the memory map of the target machine
precisely. For the coco target, you must consider what will be the
minimum amount of RAM for your target machine.

== Emitted instructions ==

For the coco with Extended Color BASIC:
 * the emitted program will contain a CLEAR command

For the c64 target:
 * the emitted program will adjust the MEMSIZE variable

The emitted program will also include:

 * (for coco) an EXEC command
 * (for c64) a SYS command

== Concerning the PRG file format ==

This option should be used with care.

The PRG file format provides two unsigned 8-bit bytes at the start of the
file indicating where the machine language routine should be loaded to.
These two bytes (in little-endian order) are read by BASICloader to obtain
a start address. It is also the exec address.

If a PRG file is intended to be started with a command such as:

  LOAD "*",8,1

(notice the ,1) then it is intended that the Commodore 64 will read this
start location and load to that address. For a PRG file that is loaded
without the ,1 the start location is ignored and the Commodore 64 uses its
default location, which is 0x0801.

Most machine language programs on the Commodore 64 are in fact hybrids of
BASIC and machine language. They are intended to load to location 0x0801
and to be executed with the command "RUN" instead of "SYS".

These files cannot be used with BASICloader, since if they were poked into
memory they would overwrite the loader program.  BASICloader makes some
attempt to detect this. If detected, BASICloader will fail with a message
saying "Error: Program is unsuitable for use with BASICloader".

Generally, you should only be using BASICloader on machine language blobs
that you have created yourself.
